Add doc for neural-sparse-query-two-phase-processor. (#7306)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/search-pipelines/neural-sparse-query-two-phase-processor.md

---
layout: default
title: NeuralSparse query two-phase processor
nav_order: 13
has_children: false
parent: Search processors
grand_parent: Search pipelines
---

# NeuralSparse query two-phase processor

> The `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search request processor is designed to set a speed-up pipeline for [neural sparse search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-sparse-search/). It accelerates the neural sparse query by breaking down the original method of scoring all documents with all tokens into two steps. In the first step, it uses high-weight tokens to score the documents and filters out the top documents; in the second step, it uses low-weight tokens to fine-tune the scores of the top documents.

Reviewer: fine-tune is usually used for ML models, maybe we should use rescore here

Author: Replaced with word rescore.

### Compound query support
There is 6 types of [compound query]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/compound/index/). And we only support bool query now.
- [x] bool (Boolean)
- [ ] boosting 
- [ ] constant_score
- [ ] dis_max (disjunction max)
- [ ] function_score
- [ ] hybrid

Notice, neural sparse query or bool query with a boost parameter (not same as boosting query) are also supported.

#### Supported Example
##### Single neural sparse query

```
GET /my-nlp-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "neural_sparse": {
      "passage_embedding": {
        "query_text": "Hi world"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
##### Neural sparse query nested in bool query

```
GET /my-nlp-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "should": [
        {
          "neural_sparse": {
            "passage_embedding": {
              "query_text": "Hi world",
              "model_id": <model-id>
            },
            "boost": 2.0
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
  
## Metrics

> In doc-only mode, the two-phase processor will reduce the query latency by 20% to 50%, depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters.

Reviewer: `also depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters` Do you mean this depends on the dataset distribution? Because I think we're using default two-phase parameters and consistent index settings in our experiments

> In doc-only mode, the two-phase processor will reduce the query latency by 20% to 50%, depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters.

Author: > is this sparse_vector search or end to end latency

end to end.

> In doc-only mode, the two-phase processor will reduce the query latency by 20% to 50%, depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters.

Author: > `also depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters` Do you mean this depends on the dataset distribution? Because I think we're using default two-phase parameters and consistent index settings in our experiments

Yes, i corrected the description to index specific data distribution and dataset size .

> In doc-only mode, the two-phase processor will reduce the query latency by 20% to 50%, depending on the index configuration and two-phase parameters.

Reviewer: > end to end.

I think the speed up ratio on pure sparse vector is more important. The model inference cost and retrieval cost is orthogonal and the 2-phase pipeline only optimize the retrieval cost.

---
layout: default
title: Neural spare query two-phase processor
nav_order: 13
parent: Search processors
grand_parent: Search pipelines
---

# Neural sparse query two-phase processor
Introduced 2.15
{: .label .label-purple }

> The `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search processer is designed to set a speed-up search pipelines for [neural sparse search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-sparse-search/). It accelerates the neural sparse query by breaking down the original method of scoring all documents with all tokens into two steps: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search processor is designed to set a speed-up search pipelines for [neural sparse search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-sparse-search/). It accelerates the neural sparse query by breaking down the original method of scoring all documents with all tokens into two steps: 
```

1. High-weight tokens score the documents and filter out the top documents.
2. Low-weight tokens rescore the top documents.

## Request fields

The following table lists all available request fields.

Field | Data type | Description
:--- | :--- | :---
`enabled` | Boolean | Controls whether the two-phase processor is enabled. Default is `true`.
`two_phase_parameter` | Object | A map of key-value pairs representing the two-phase parameters and their associated values. You can specify the value of `prune_ratio`, `expansion_rate`, `max_window_size`, or any combination of these three parameters. Optional.

> `two_phase_parameter.prune_ratio` | Float | A ratio that represents how to split the high-weight tokens and low-weight tokens. The threshold is the token's max score * prune_ratio. Valid range is [0,1]. Default is `0.4`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`two_phase_parameter.prune_ratio` | Float | A ratio that represents how to split the high-weight tokens and low-weight tokens. The threshold is the token's maximum score multiplied by its `prune_ratio`. Valid range is [0,1]. Default is `0.4`
```

`two_phase_parameter.expansion_rate` | Float | A rate that specifies how many documents will be fine-tuned during the second phase. The second phase doc number equals query size (default 10) * expansion rate. Valid range is greater than 1.0. Default is `5.0`

> `two_phase_parameter.max_window_size` | Int | A limit number of the two-phase fine-tune documents. Valid range is greater than 50. Default is `10000`.

Reviewer 2: @natebower: How does this work?

```suggestion
`two_phase_parameter.max_window_size` | Int | The maximum number of documents which can be processed using the two-phase processor. Valid range is greater than 50. Default is `10000`.
```

Reviewer 3: @Naarcha-AWS LGTM but changed "which" to "that".

> `two_phase_parameter.max_window_size` | Int | A limit number of the two-phase fine-tune documents. Valid range is greater than 50. Default is `10000`.

Reviewer 3: I'm not following the description. Please revise and tag me on the rewrite.

`tag` | String | The processor's identifier. Optional.
`description` | String | A description of the processor. Optional.

## Example

The following example creates a search pipeline with a `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search request processor. 

### Create search pipeline

> The following example request creates a search pipeline with a `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search request processor. The processor sets a custom model ID at the index level and provides different default model IDs for two specific fields in the index:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example request creates a search pipeline with a `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` search request processor. The processor sets a custom model ID at the index level and provides different default model IDs for two specific index fields:
```

```json
PUT /_search/pipeline/two_phase_search_pipeline
{
  "request_processors": [
    {
      "neural_sparse_two_phase_processor": {
        "tag": "neural-sparse",
        "description": "This processor is making two-phase processor.",
        "enabled": true,
        "two_phase_parameter": {
          "prune_ratio": custom_prune_ratio,
          "expansion_rate": custom_expansion_rate,
          "max_window_size": custom_max_window_size
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Set search pipeline

> After the two-phase pipeline is created, set the `index.search.default_pipeline` setting to the pipeline name of the index for which you want to use the pipeline:

Reviewer 3: I'm not following the end here. Do we mean something like "to the name of the pipeline for the index on which you want to use the two-phase pipeline"?

> After the two-phase pipeline is created, set the `index.search.default_pipeline` setting to the pipeline name of the index for which you want to use the pipeline:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the two-phase pipeline is created, set the `index.search.default_pipeline` setting to the pipeline name of the index for which you want to use the pipeline:
```
```suggestion
After the two-phase pipeline is created, set the `index.search.default_pipeline` setting to the name of the pipeline for the index on which you want to use the two-phase pipeline:
```

```json
PUT /index-name/_settings 
{
  "index.search.default_pipeline" : "two_phase_search_pipeline"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Limitation

> The 'neural_sparse_two_phase_processor' contains the following limitations:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` has the following limitations.
```

### Version support

> `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` can only be used with OpenSearch 2.15 or greater.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `neural_sparse_two_phase_processor` can only be used with OpenSearch 2.15 or later.
```

### Compound query support

> As of OpenSearch 2.15, only the Boolean [compound query]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/compound/index/) is supported

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of OpenSearch 2.15, only the Boolean [compound query]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/compound/index/) is supported.
```

> Neural sparse queries and boolean queries with a boost parameter (not a boosting query) are also supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Neural sparse queries and Boolean queries with a boost parameter (not boosting queries) are also supported.
```

> #### Supported example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Examples
```

The following examples show neural sparse queries with the supported query types.

> ##### Single neural sparse query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Single neural sparse query
```

```
GET /my-nlp-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "neural_sparse": {
      "passage_embedding": {
        "query_text": "Hi world"
        "model_id": <model-id>
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Neural sparse query nested in Boolean query

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Neural sparse query nested in a Boolean query
```

> ##### Neural sparse query nested in boolean query

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Neural sparse query nested in Boolean query
```

```
GET /my-nlp-index/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "should": [
        {
          "neural_sparse": {
            "passage_embedding": {
              "query_text": "Hi world",
              "model_id": <model-id>
            },
            "boost": 2.0
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
  

> ## P99 Latency Metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## P99 latency metrics
```

> On an OpenSearch cluster set up on 3 m5.4xlarge Amazon EC2 instances, OpenSearch conducts neural sparse query's P99 latency tests on indexes corresponding to over ten datasets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On an OpenSearch cluster set up on 3 m5.4xlarge Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, OpenSearch conducts neural sparse query P99 latency tests on indexes corresponding to more than 10 datasets.
```

> On an OpenSearch cluster set up on 3 m5.4xlarge Amazon EC2 instances, OpenSearch conducts neural sparse query's P99 latency tests on indexes corresponding to over ten datasets.

Reviewer 3: On an OpenSearch cluster set up on" => "For an OpenSearch cluster configured with"?

Reviewer 2: It would be "On" or "Using" since the testing is done internally.

> On an OpenSearch cluster set up on 3 m5.4xlarge Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, OpenSearch conducts neural sparse query P99 latency tests on indexes corresponding to more than 10 datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using an OpenSearch cluster set up on three m5.4xlarge Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, OpenSearch conducts neural sparse query P99 latency tests on indexes corresponding to more than 10 datasets.
```

### Doc-only mode latency metric

In doc-only mode, the two-phase processor can significantly decrease query latency, as shown by the following latency metrics:

> - Average latency without 2-phase: 53.56 ms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Average latency without the two-phase processor: 53.56 ms
```

> - Average latency with 2-phase: 38.61 ms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Average latency with the two-phase processor: 38.61 ms
```

> This results in an overall reduction of approximately 27.92% in latency. Most indexes show a significant decrease in latency with the 2-phase processor, with reductions ranging from 5.14% to 84.6. The specific latency optimization values depend on the data distribution within the indexes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This results in an overall latency reduction of approximately 27.92%. Most indexes show a significant latency reduction when using the two-phase processor, with reductions ranging from 5.14 to 84.6%. The specific latency optimization values depend on the data distribution within the indexes.
```

### Bi-encoder mode latency metric

> In bi-encoder mode, the two-phase processor can significantly decrease query latency. Analyzing the data:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In bi-encoder mode, the two-phase processor can significantly decrease query latency, as shown by the following latency metrics:
```

> - Average latency without 2-phase: 300.79 ms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Average latency without the two-phase processor: 300.79 ms
```

> - Average latency with 2-phase: 121.64 ms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Average latency with the two-phase processor: 121.64 ms
```

> This results in an overall reduction of approximately 59.56% in latency. Most indexes show a significant decrease in latency with the 2-phase processor, with reductions ranging from 1.56% to 82.84%. The specific latency optimization values depend on the data distribution within the indexes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This results in an overall latency reduction of approximately 59.56%. Most indexes show a significant latency reduction when using the two-phase processor, with reductions ranging from 1.56 to 82.84%. The specific latency optimization values depend on the data distribution within the indexes.
```
